Eso-bang! is a 3D isometric rogue-lite/tower-defense game based around engaging with procedurally-generated topography. As the player, you're placed in control of a glowing orb that zips along a network of towers you place in order to influence the paths of a seemingly-endless flurry of physics objects that precipitate out of the air and flow down the terrain beneath you. 

Your main objective is to gather experience and upgrades while preventing your "HEAT" meter from maxing out. You accrue HEAT as long as physics objects (called "TOKENS") rest on the terrain, so the game provides you with a variety of different abilities (called "INVOCATIONS") that allow you to manipulate the terrain, generate force fields, and more, to ensure that the TOKENS eventually make their way off the map and allows the level to "cool off".

Experience and upgrades are gathered by collecting TOKENS (the game calls this process 
"DISTILLATION"). While allowing tokens to run off the map generates some experience, the most effective way to increase the strength of your towers and abilities is by using other, special abilities to DISTILL any tokens they affect. For example, one INVOCATION creates a holographic wall that DISTILLS any token that crosses it. Placing this wall at the bottom of a steep slope can quickly generate a ton of experience as tokens naturally roll through it as they follow the shape of the terrain. There's a lot of satisfaction to be found in reading and understanding the topography of a given level in order to situate your INVOCATIONS so they generate the most possible experience.

While all tokens can be distilled, not all are content to passively follow the shape of the terrain. As a level progresses, special CORRUPTED tokens begin to precipitate. These tokens are a more active threat to your survival, and can do anything from corrupting any normal tokens they touch, making them generate more heat and grant less experience when collected, to exploding and forming craters in the level's terrain. Some corrupted tokens can even directly attack the player's avatar, which can generate a massive amount of heat if hit.

A core component of Eso-bang! is the discovery of new invocations. Rather than leveling-up and being presented with a selection of abilities to choose from, INVOCATIONS can be selected at any time by forming a phrase out of an ever-changing pool of syllables and pseudo-words (the game calls these "COMPONENTS") which are automatically derived from tokens that you distill. Each token you collect pushes a new component into this pool, and each combination of components you select maps to a different type of invocation. For instance, one combination of components, IE - DES - VALLUM, invokes the aforementioned holographic wall, whereas a similar combination of components, IE - DES -  PILA, invokes a holographic cylinder with similar behavior. As you reach more difficult levels, you begin to unlock new collections of these components which are then added to the possible distillations on subsequent playthroughs.

Each level ends once enough tokens have been distilled, or when specific invocations are used to summon boss entities. Each boss entity has its own core mechanic, ranging from a classic bullet hell-style boss-fight, to one that teleports around the level while starting fires that spread around nearby tokens.
